Quorum based failover (#2668)
patroni/patroni: docs/replication_modes.rst

You can ensure that a standby never becomes the synchronous standby by setting ``nosync`` tag to true. This is recommended to set for standbys that are behind slow network connections and would cause performance degradation when becoming a synchronous standby.

Synchronous mode can be switched on and off using ``patronictl edit-config`` command or via Patroni REST interface. See :ref:`dynamic configuration <dynamic_configuration>` for instructions.

Note: Because of the way synchronous replication is implemented in PostgreSQL it is still possible to lose transactions even when using ``synchronous_mode_strict``. If the PostgreSQL backend is cancelled while waiting to acknowledge replication (as a result of packet cancellation due to client timeout or backend failure) transaction changes become visible for other backends. Such changes are not yet replicated and may be lost in case of standby promotion.

Synchronous Replication Factor
==============================

> The parameter ``synchronous_node_count`` is used by Patroni to manage number of synchronous standby databases. It is set to 1 by default. It has no effect when ``synchronous_mode`` is set to off. When enabled, Patroni manages precise number of synchronous standby databases based on parameter ``synchronous_node_count`` and adjusts the state in DCS & ``synchronous_standby_names`` in PostgreSQL as members join and leave. If the parameter is set to a value higher than the number of eligible nodes it will be automatically reduced by Patroni down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parameter ``synchronous_node_count`` is used by Patroni to manage the number of synchronous standby databases. It is set to ``1`` by default. It has no effect when ``synchronous_mode`` is set to ``off``. When enabled, Patroni manages the precise number of synchronous standby databases based on parameter ``synchronous_node_count`` and adjusts the state in DCS & ``synchronous_standby_names`` in PostgreSQL as members join and leave. If the parameter is set to a value higher than the number of eligible nodes it will be automatically reduced by Patroni.
```

Quorum commit helps to reduce worst case latencies, even during normal operation, as a higher latency of replicating to one standby can be compensated by other standbys.

The quorum-based synchronous mode could be enabled by setting ``synchronous_mode`` to ``quorum`` using ``patronictl edit-config`` command or via Patroni REST interface. See :ref:`dynamic configuration <dynamic_configuration>` for instructions.

Other parameters, like ``synchronous_node_count``, ``maximum_lag_on_syncnode``, and ``synchronous_mode_strict`` continue to work the same way as with ``synchronous_mode=on``.

Example:
---------

``/config`` key in DCS
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: YAML

    synchronous_mode: quorum
    synchronous_node_count: 2
    ...

``/sync`` key in DCS
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: JSON

    {
        "leader": "node0",
        "sync_standby": "node1,node2,node3",
        "quorum": 1
    }

postgresql.conf
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: INI

    synchronous_standby_names = 'ANY 2 (node1,node2,node3)'

> If the primary (``node0``) failed, in the above example two of the ``node1``, ``node2``, ``node3`` will have the latest transaction received, but we don't know which ones. To figure out whether the node ``node1`` has received the latest transaction, we needs to compare its LSN with the LSN on **at least** one node (``quorum=1`` in the ``/sync`` key) of ``node2`` and ``node3``. If ``node1`` isn't behind of at least one of them, we can guaranty that there will be no user visible data loss if ``node1`` is promoted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the primary (``node0``) failed, in the above example two of the ``node1``, ``node2``, ``node3`` will have the latest transaction received, but we don't know which ones. To figure out whether the node ``node1`` has received the latest transaction, we need to compare its LSN with the LSN on **at least** one node (``quorum=1`` in the ``/sync`` key) among ``node2`` and ``node3``. If ``node1`` isn't behind of at least one of them, we can guarantee that there will be no user visible data loss if ``node1`` is promoted.
```

.. _quorum_mode:

Quorum commit mode
==================

Starting from PostgreSQL v10 Patroni supports quorum-based synchronous replication.

In this mode, Patroni maintains synchronization state in the DCS, containing the latest known primary, the number of nodes required for quorum and the nodes currently eligible to vote on quorum. In steady state, the nodes voting on quorum are the leader and all synchronous standbys. This state is updated with strict ordering constraints, with regards to node promotion and ``synchronous_standby_names``, to ensure that at all times any subset of voters that can achieve quorum includes at least one node with the latest successful commit.

On each iteration of HA loop, Patroni re-evaluates synchronous standby choices and quorum, based on node availability and requested cluster configuration. In PostgreSQL versions above 9.6 all eligible nodes are added as synchronous standbys as soon as their replication catches up to leader.

> Quorum commit helps to reduce worst case latencies, even during normal operation, as a higher latency of replicating to one standby can be compensated by other standbys.

Author: > My understanding so far is that roughly:
`synchronous_mode: on`: sets `synchronous_standby_names`: `<synchronous_node_count> (<list_of_standbys>)`

Almost. It will be not a `<synchronous_node_count>`, but `len(<list_of_standbys>)`, where `<list_of_standbys>` are nodes that are eligible (state == 'running', don't have `nosync` tag, and don't lag more than `maximum_lag_on_syncnode`) to be synchronous and the total number of nodes in the list will not exceed `synchronous_node_count`.

> `synchronous_mode: quorum`: sets `synchronous_standby_names:` `ANY <synchronous_node_count> (<list_of_ALL_standbys>)`

Also almost.
- `<list_of_ALL_standbys>` -- not all nodes, but nodes with state == 'running', without `nosync` tag, and not lagging more than `maximum_lag_on_syncnode`.
- `synchronous_node_count` -- there will be a value `N`: `1 <= N <= min(synchronous_node_count, len(<list_of_standbys>))`

The main difference between `synchronous_mode` `on` and `quorum` that in the first case Patroni picks a fixed number of synchronous nodes and they are all synchronous. During failover with `synchronous_mode: on` we can **safely promote any node** from this  list and there will be no client visible data loss.

With `quorum` there will be something like `ANY 2 (n1, n2, n3)` in `synchronous_standby_names` and in order to guaranty that there is no data loss during failover Patroni has to check some minimum subset of nodes from this list to prove that the given node received not less WAL stream than others.
Example:
primary: n0
quorum: ANY 2 (n1, n2, n3)

That is, two nodes from this least could be promoted without client visible data loss, and every node need to figure out whether it has all data.
Lets say n0 and n1 are failed. But, we know that at least two nodes from n1, n2, n3 have the latest data, therefore at least one from n2, n3 also has it. Therefore n2 **must** see n3 and compare LSNs to make decision about promotion. If n2 is not behind of n3, than n2 could be promoted and there will be no client visible data loss.

> Quorum commit helps to reduce worst case latencies, even during normal operation, as a higher latency of replicating to one standby can be compensated by other standbys.

Reviewer: Cool, thanks for clarifying!

I guess it would be valuable to describe this in the docs, even if with a simpler approach, just so users can getter a better understanding of the difference between each of the synchronous modes.

BTW I intend to get back to reviewing this PR today.
